He approached every task
in an individual manner,
without repeating any element
from any previous design projects.
The main theme
in this case was an idea
which could be defined as
an insistence on excellence.
This is why he is considered
the founder of the Zagreb
School of Architecture.
CHILDHOOD AND EDUCATION
He had a tough
life and died at the age of 50.
He was of humble origins and he
lost his parents quite early in life.
He was born in Lo ka Ves,
a village near Roga ka Slatina.
Today it is part
of Roga ka Slatina.
As he was orphaned quite early
on, he was raised by an uncle
who was a successful
construction entrepreneur in Graz.
He paid for Kova i 's education
at a crafts school in Graz.
After working for a while in
Graz, Kova i came to Zagreb,
looking for a better
living, so to say,
and here he started working for
Waidmann and Gjuro Carnelutti,
who later recommended
him to Hermann Bollé.
Hermann Bollé saw that Kova i
had great talent and sensibility
so he sent him to the Academy
of Fine Arts in Vienna
where Kova i opted to study
under a leader of modern architecture
at the time, Otto Wagner.
He not only graduated there,
but also acquired all the skills
for his further work.
THE ZAGREB YEARS
When he finished his studies,
he was barely making ends meet.
It was difficult to find work.
At one point he joined
forces with Josip Markovi .
This was between 1902 and 1904.
I am talking about the famous
architect Josip Markovi ,
Picasso's Dora Maar's father.
As he felt constrained by what
Zagreb of the time could offer him,
Markovi sought
refuge in the New World.
He went to America and invited
Kova i to follow in his footsteps.
Markovi made
a career in South America.
Kova i , on the other hand,
showed a strange tenacity
when he decided to devote
himself to the city of Zagreb.
We might say he
was married to architecture.
Only later in life did
he decide to really get married.
He married Terezija Arhani
who painstakingly
kept all his belongings
and donated their perfectly
preserved flat in Massaryk Street
to the City of Zagreb. It is now
part of the City Museum
and is open to the public.
BEGINNING CONSTRUCTION
They were looking for a
place for the Stock Exchange.
The Rifle Range, now Tu kanac
Cinema, was one option.
They even considered
redecorating a part of the Art Pavilion.
In the end, they found temporary
housing first in 1 Juri i Street
and then in Isis's
premises in Hatz Street.
In 1920, they decided to build
their own, no-nonsense, edifice.
Soon the Stock Exchange
Council purchased land
in the new part of the city,
east of Dra kovi Street.
These years saw
its intense construction
even though it had all been
planned as far back as in 1905.
Six top architects were invited
to submit their designs
for the new building.
They were all highly respected
architects, among whom were
Kova i , Ignjat Fischer,
Aladar Baranyai,
Lazar Dundjerski, the least
known of the six, or better said,
the somewhat forgotten architect
of the time, and Bruno Bauer.
They also invited Jo e Ple nik,
but he did not submit a design.
Therefore five of them
took part in the competition.
The most important
person in the jury
was the noted Berlin
architect Hermann Muthesius.
He took Kova i 's and Fischer's
designs to be the most successful,
with an emphasis on Kova i 's
as his design encompassed the
entrance to the new part of the city.
How did Kova i approach this
diagonal entrance to new Zagreb?
He offered two
almost identical buildings.
The left one was
to be the stock exchange
and the purpose of the right one
was yet to be decided.
Together they formed
a magnificent composition
which would make the entrance
to the new part of the city
adequately grandiose.
THE LINKING OF INCOMPATIBLES
The initial design, of course,
underwent a whole array
of changes and improvements.
This is, in fact, one of the
key features of Kova i 's work.
He was a tireless creator
who had always insisted on
better, improved solutions
both in design and execution.
We might describe the exterior
of the edifice as neoclassical.
The reason for this
is the nature of the building.
It is a financial institution
that deals with
many different activities.
To reflect this,
classical elements were used.
However, if you look
at its spatial organisation
and the elements
of its construction
as well as its
overall appearance,
the building is truly modernist.
This does not apply only to the
dome of reinforced concrete
but to a whole array of small,
state-of-the-art elements,
from elevators to electric
clocks, ventilation systems etc.
Kova i is, of course,
the architect,
but the building's fit-out was
done by his successor,
Hugo Ehrlich. He is the designer
of the building's interior.
Kova i died just before
the topping-out ceremony,
having received an invitation
for it on his death bed.
We use the term roh-bau
for topping-out today.
Ehrlich was given some
guidelines on how to continue
by architect Alfred Albini, who had
worked with Kova i on the palace.
But Ehrlich had to
do a lot on his own.
VIRTUOSO COMPOSITION
I would call it a virtuoso
composition in the third dimension.
When you analyse the main
cross-section of the building,
when you notice the manipulation
of heights, levels and floors,
the skill as well as the brilliant
purity of the spatial organisation,
you realise that the building
remains almost unsurpassed even today.
THE DETAILS
Out of all the details, I would
single out the electric clocks
that are placed all over the
building and function perfectly even today
regardless of the fact that they
were all differently designed.
Another professionally
interesting detail
is the central part of the floor
in the main stock exchange hall.
It was laid
by inserting glass elements into
the tenuous concrete framework
with the purpose of directing
daylight, or light in general,
into space, i. e. into
the Gremial Hall,
where the wise men of the
board of directors used to meet
and where the whole decision-
making process took place.
Another detail I remember
from the ancient year of 1955,
when I had the chance
to enter the building,
and that remains etched on
my memory, are the rotary doors.
It is a highly contemporary
element which is widely used even today
although in different materials
and in a different mode of execution.
It is still a highly popular and
valuable element of construction.
We shouldn't disregard the
modernity visible in the facade
and achieved by the famous
horizontal sliding windows,
windows that open
by using slides.
They were manufactured
with such excellence
that they have been functioning
perfectly to this day.
Their studs have been
perfectly preserved
as has all their hardware,
and they are in fact a trademark
of a whole different (later) era.